# Executive Redfish Briefing #
## When the Status Quo needs to go ##
Information Technology moves at a dizzying pace.  The industry has gone from independent, single servers to server farms and highly integrated composable architectures and the “cloud” in the blink of an eye.  And simply put, management of this technology has not kept up.  Gone are the days when an IT person had to manage only 10 racks of equipment, all from the same manufacturer, all on a homogenous software environment.  Today’s computing needs are vastly different – enormous server farms with blades or composable infrastructure systems, servers from multiple vendors, attached to a storage farm elsewhere from yet another vendor via networking equipment from another vendor still.  Ask any IT manager how much time, money and effort goes into maintaining their IT infrastructure.  The answer?  Too much – too much time, money, complexity and proprietary tools.  Ask them what there isn’t enough of: skilled personnel, flexibility, scalability, security, ease-of-use or industry standards. 

By the mid-1990s, the industry had a fractured patchwork of management solutions – some proprietary, some open, but none of them all-encompassing. This was also a period of explosive internet growth – eBay, Amazon, Flickr and others were driving rapid evolution using open tools in their web development.  In this same period, the hardware landscape to support this growth had also changed radically.
The explosion of the web demanded massive, scalable systems. More importantly, compute platform customers demanded adoption of an industry-wide specification to manage the growing tangle.  Manageability interface standards were created, but the industry quickly exhausted the functionality of these manageability interfaces and it was no longer viable to augment these standards.  Moreover, the end-user data centers wanted a manageability interface which utilized technologies proven in the cloud datacenters and leveraged existing tool chains. 

While computing technology companies often compete in the market, they know that it is in the industry’s best interest to work together on problems that plague everyone in the industry.  The Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF), formed in 1992, is a consortium of industry leaders working together to solve management problems facing the industry. In 2012, one of the companies in the DMTF consortium decided it was time to address the issue head on and reached out to other industry leaders. The founding group consisted of Dell (Dell, Inc.), Emerson Networking (Vertiv), HP (HPE) and Intel. This small group began working on a project called “Redfish.”  Initial work was done to develop the framework and in 2014, a working group within the DMTF was tasked to create and publish an open, industry-standard specification and schema using existing tool chains and meet the expectations of cloud and web-based IT professionals.  This specification was aimed at scalable platform hardware management, but it would also be useful for other management domains such as data center power, cooling and environmental sensors, and flexible enough to be used for future computing technology. Additional goals were to incorporate robust security requirements and make this new specification and schema usable by personnel with minimal experience.  

## What is Redfish? ##
Redfish is part philosophy, part specification and part schema, created to simplify the task of IT management.  It leverages common internet and web protocols and, perhaps more importantly offers a separation of the protocols from the data model, which allows them to be revised independently.  This new model represents modern hardware designs and does not require advanced programming or IT management knowledge to use.  

Redfish is based on the following protocols or specifications:

- RESTful API for the data protocol
- HTTP or HTTPS for the web protocol
- JSON as the data format
- JSON-schema and/or OASIS CSDL (Common Schema Definition Language)
- Data models for equipment representation, state/status, and configuration

So what exactly is RESTful API? It stands for REpresentational State Transfer Application Program Interface.  In simple terms, it is the data protocol that allows access to and manipulation of web resources. Initially, those resources were defined as documents or files, but has grown to include just about anything (file, equipment, etc.) that could be identified via the web.  Instead of web pages, a RESTful API utilizes programmatic payloads to provide organized data.

With the RESTful API protocol, the next piece in the puzzle is HTTP or HTTPS (HTTP Secure).  We use HTTP every day when we access anything on the web.  It is the set of rules that govern how information is exchanged or transferred on the web. The defined security protocols of HTTPS mean that additional firewalls or other security protocols are unnecessary. The same HTTPS operations a web browser performs on websites are also used with RESTful APIs, such as “Get,” “Modify,” and “Create” operations. This leverages the standard HTTPS definition to its fullest extent and does not require any special modifications to support RESTful APIs.
 
JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) defines what the data will look like.  It was designed to be human-readable and machine readable. JSON is easy to learn, concise and well-supported by the industry. Almost all modern languages support JSON encoding either natively or using publicly available libraries.
 
The data that flows over that transport is defined separately in the set of Redfish schemas.  Every resource (the individual JSON payload received from a URL) is backed by one of those schemas. A separate, independent schema definition for each resource type -- ComputerSystem, Processor and Disk, for example, means that they can be revised individually as functionality is added – and all of that happens independently of the protocol version. The schemas are rigidly defined but are also useful for kickstarting client-side applications.

These protocols and specifications each have broad, industry support and can adapt to changing technology. When combined, they form an elegant solution capable of staying abreast of changes in technology and use the same skill sets and tool chains as many other IT and dev/ops tasks. Redfish’s unique combination of these underlying strata means that versioning suddenly becomes a lot less important at the top level – an important break from the past and one of the main points that sets it apart from previous specifications. 

## What does all this mean for the future of IT management? ##
Support for the Redfish specification and schema continues to grow and gain acceptance.  The Redfish specification and schema was initially conceived as a management tool for computing hardware.  However, during the development process, the working group realized that this specification needed to expand to include all aspects of computing technology.  The DMTF continues to collaborate with the SNIA on their Redfish model for network storage and storage services (Swordfish).  The DMTF is also working with the UEFI Forum on system BIOS using the Redfish interface.  The DMTF is working with the Green Grid on models to manage the data center facility devices (DCIM) for power and cooling.  And, while no official alliance is in place, they are pursuing work on switch modelling with the IETF.  Additionally, both the Open Compute Project and Project Scorpio have ongoing efforts to utilize the Redfish interface.

Initial support for Redfish was quite small -- a handful of companies.  However, as the specification and schema were developed and implemented, Redfish has gained traction in the industry.  And this support has not just come from industry leaders.  Developers, users, individual companies, academia and trade groups (Telco) have realized the possibilities that exist when an entire industry adopts a single, unifying standard. 

The Redfish specification (Version 1) was released in August 2015 and SNIA released Swordfish in August 2016 for storage platforms. The Redfish Forum has aimed at three to four releases a year to roll out additional features. Since Redfish is an open standard and schema, developers and users have access to all the information they need to understand and implement it.  The Redfish developer hub contains resources such as the specifications, schema index, registries, mockups, user forum, whitepapers, links to YouTube videos and webinars. The hub also contains a link to the Github which hosts DMTF's open source contributions to the tool-chain.

Redfish was conceived because of the myriad of issues surrounding IT management.  The simple elegance of using existing, well-understood and well-designed tools in concert to provide a viable solution is what has set Redfish as the standard for today and the future of the computing industry.  
